---
title: 'Allison J. Pugh’sLonging and Belonging: Parents, Children, and Consumer Culture'
authors:
- William A. Corsaro
publication: hedgehog-review
date: Spring 2010
url: https://hedgehogreview.com/issues/emotional-control/articles/allison-j-pughs-longing-and-belonging-parents-children-and-consumer-culture
word_count: 1278
issue: Emotional Control
section: Book Reviews
---

# Allison J. Pugh’sLonging and Belonging: Parents, Children, and Consumer Culture

Late in this wonderfully written and theoretically rich book, Pugh inadvertently implies the difficult challenges she must have faced in studying children’s consumer culture, which she characterizes as having “lightning-quick transitions” in which “fads and fashions change from week to week” (225). Would not whatever one could document and theorize about parents, children, and consumer culture be out of date almost immediately upon reaching publication? In terms of children’s consumer products themselves, most of what Pugh documents (things like Game Boys and Magic Cards, for example) probably have much less relevance in children’s everyday lives today. However, the theoretical narrative in which Pugh frames her rich ethnographic and interview data about consumer culture may indeed be timeless.

Sociological to its core, Pugh’s analysis of consumerism on the part of children and their parents is not so much related to individual desires, wants, or needs, but is rather primarily about children’s collective belonging—fitting into their peer groups in the present and maintaining or improving their collective social status in the future.

In the local peer cultures of the three settings Pugh studied in Oakland, California (upper-middle-class private and public schools, whose students were primarily white, and a low-income, after school program, where the children were primarily African-American, Latino, or Asian-American) the children created and participated in what she calls “economies of dignity.” These economies had “their own scrip, or meaningful tokens, their own norms about managing children’s conversations, and their own processes of negotiating value” (52). Scrip could range from material consumer goods or artifacts like Game Boys, Pokémon and Magic Cards, and Bratz and American Girl dolls to shared experiences with family and friends like birthday parties, visits to amusement parks, and vacations. Although the scrip varied in real economic value across the three groups, it was not necessarily having the most _expensive_ scrip that was important. Rather, children vied to lay claim to having _similar_ scrip to that of their peers or to be able to do what Goffman termed the necessary facework to maintain dignity when ownership of the particularly valued scrip of the moment was lacking. If a child could not say “I got that too” or “we went there too” in response to a scrip claim of one or more peers, the child had to do the facework necessary to remain in the economy of dignity.

It is in such facework that we see children’s agency and creativity. For example, a boy of Latino immigrants was unable to name toys or special trips he had made to fill in a poster about what he was thankful for, as his peers did at the low income, after school program. Urged on to say he was thankful for what he did _have_ by a supportive friend, the young boy, Marco, said he was thankful for his ancestors, something clearly valued in his family, thus doing what Pugh calls “counterframing” as an alternative to a consumer culture of possessions. A similar example was seen among wealthy children where one boy, when pressed, claimed to have perhaps six hundred Pokémon cards, and another countered to have been given five hundred dollars for his birthday from his grandmother. A third boy taken aback by such extravagance was speechless for a moment but then said, “I’m saving my money for college.”

Pugh noted other inventive types of facework the children employed like bridging labor, claiming, concealing, and patrolling—all of which allowed the children in various ways to participate actively in the economy of dignity, even if they lacked a particular possession or experience. Such examples aptly demonstrate the collective nature of peer culture and how consumer artifacts and experiences get embedded in myriad ways in the children’s strong desire for a sense of belonging to the group.

Although Pugh provides many insights from her ethnographic observations on the children, being a scholar of peer cultures I was left wanting more than the one chapter she dedicates to them. She devotes much more attention to her fifty-four interviews of adults, primarily parents of children from the three Oakland settings. Here her analysis takes two overlapping tracks both related to childrearing and consumer culture. The first, parental beliefs and strategies in responding to their children’s consumer requests and behavior, intersects nicely with the ethnographic data; a second track involving what she calls parents shaping the pathways of children moves the study to a broader view of the relationship of consumerism, social class, and social inequality.

Overall, both the wealthy and low-income parents were attuned to the relation between consumerism and their children’s economies of dignity. Therefore, fearing “differences that threatened their children’s social belonging,” parents generally reported being responsive to their children’s consumer requests (90). However, the ways they went about being responsive did vary by social class. The wealthy parents worried more about the influence of the media and the hedonistic nature of consumer culture and set rules for the use of consumer goods. They also normally gave children allowances from which they could save to make their own purchases. The lower-income families worried more about how to afford things their children wanted than media influence or the objects’ intrinsic value. However, in contrast to typical portrayals of reckless spending by the poor, the lower-class parents in Pugh’s study planned carefully for purchases by saving or waiting for times of unexpected cash flows.

In an interesting twist, Pugh did not limit her analysis to conventional types of child-rearing consumption and found in her interview data evidence of what she calls “pathway con- sumption.” This type of consumption involves “spending on the opportunities that shape children’s trajectories” or “a combination of aspiration and uncertainty we might identify as hope” (178). Here much of what Pugh identifies, like private lessons, summer camps, private schooling, or changing residence to be in a neighborhood with better public schools, is in line with Annette Lareau’s notion of a “concerted cultivation.” Unlike Lareau, Pugh found the desire for pathway consumption among lower-class families as well, but it was most often blocked by lack of resources or what she called the luxury of difference the affluent families possessed. As in Lareau’s study, we see how insidiously social reproduction works.

Pugh’s findings gleaned from parental interviews were much more nuanced than my summary here can capture. She uses a narrative style based on case studies of particular families that is engaging, but sometimes raises questions about the representativeness of the data presented compared to her entire sample. She also does a nice job of pursuing negative cases. For example, she shows how an immigrant refugee family from Sudan rejects their children’s economy of dignity and refuses to use money being saved for a middle-class home to buy things they saw as wasteful. Even more interesting is Pugh’s discussion of upper-middle-class, African-American families who insist on exposing their children to the lifestyle and culture of working-class and poor African-Americans by enrolling them in athletic and other activities in working-class and poor areas. The goal of what Pugh termed these “exposed childhoods” was to make their children comfortable in a range of contexts and styles, which would better prepare them with fuller African-American identities and the ability to code-switch as teenagers and young adults.

Overall, _Longing and Belonging_ is an important and insightful book. It is very accessible to a general audience as long as they feel free to skip most of the hundreds of footnotes that are extremely useful but still a bit distracting, even for academics. In fact, my advice to social scientists interested in childhood, family, consumerism, and social class, as well as to all parents concerned about child rearing and consumer culture, is to buy this book.