---
title: Sporting Types
authors:
- Shannon Latkin Anderson
publication: hedgehog-review
date: Spring 2005
url: https://hedgehogreview.com/issues/celebrity-culture/articles/david-l-andrews-and-steven-j-jacksons-sport-stars
word_count: 2234
subtitle: Books on Athletic Celebrities, Reviewed
issue: Celebrity Culture
section: Book Reviews
---

# Sporting Types

*Books on Athletic Celebrities, Reviewed*

For any American watching television, standing in line at the grocery store, or even following political campaigns, the presence of celebrity is ubiquitous. What many people may not think about is whether or not, and how, these public figures are affected by and affect the broader social world. Are celebrities merely vapid images to be consumed for entertainment? Do they have appeal because we identify with them? Or is it because we are captivated by the “exotic” world they inhabit? Are they “really” who they appear to be in the various forms through which we apprehend them? Do celebrities function beyond their images and offer us stories that might play a role in confronting structures of racial or gender inequality? Could they provide a common ground upon which strangers might recognize shared interests and values? These are among the questions scholars examining today’s celebrity culture seek to address, along with more particular theoretical and substantive concerns.

An underlying argument of Andrews and Jackson’s _Sport Stars: The Cultural Politics of Sporting Celebrity_ is that as a vehicle for social change, celebrity—at least sports celebrity—appears to be a non-starter. The anthology addresses the ways in which the current cult of the athlete celebrity relates to such macro structures as consumer capitalism, while simultaneously influencing how individuals interpret the social world and live their lives. Garry Whannel’s _Media Sport Stars: Masculinities and Moralities_ takes us more deeply into the complex relationships between athletes and questions of identity, consumerism, morality, and mass media, situating these within multiple theoretical frameworks, illustrating how they play out in a series of case studies, and then linking celebrity with postmodernity and morality.

In their clear and well-thought-out introduction, the editors of _Sport Stars_ give us a strong indication of where they come down on these matters. They link celebrity culture most unambiguously with television culture and consumer capitalism: “Within this context, diverse arenas such as politics, religion, commerce, the judiciary, sport, and virtually all other forms of entertainment, have cultivated their own celebrity economies. As a consequence, social institutions, practices, and issues are principally represented to, and understood within, the popular imagination through the actions of celebrated individuals” (4).

In other words, celebrity culture is both constituted by and constitutive of the social world of consumer capitalism. This can be seen most clearly by thinking about celebrities as products—images presented by agents, teams, media—and as process—the actual making, remaking, and marketing of the celebrities.

This book suggests several good reasons for why sports celebrity is an important area of scholarly research. The editors illustrate the differences between sports stars and other celebrities, focusing largely on the way in which sports are assumed to be “fundamentally meritocratic,” which reduces sports celebrities to their individual, innate physical talents, work ethic, and luck. Another differentiator is that sports are defined as competitive, and therefore the rise to prominence (and either the fall from or maintenance of that achieved height) is produced in direct relation to the (mis)fortunes of others. There really is a zero-sum game in regards to who is at the top; only one team wins and only one athlete is considered the best. And, finally, unlike celebrities whose public encounters are explicitly understood to be performances, sports celebrities are seen as “real” people taking part in real-time events. So despite the fact that their images are largely constructed, their “real” quotient is higher than that of actors, musicians, and other celebrities. From these markers distinguishing the athlete celebrity from celebrities in general, the volume proceeds with essays on specific cases.

Beginning with five chapters on American stars, the book then turns to look at twelve athletes with origins ranging from Great Britain to Argentina, Japan to Pakistan, and beyond. The inclusion of cases from around the world offers an illustrative lens for the editors’ concentration on the role of consumer capitalism, revealing both the increasingly global context of markets and the ways in which the connections of these stars to their publics remain largely national in terms. While there are differences in the stories that are being told in each essay, particular themes do wind through nearly all of them. First off, the editors and contributors take an explicitly critical, activist orientation to their subject. Rejecting values they perceive as tied to consumer capitalism, and seeing an inextricable link between it and celebrity culture, they seek to pull back the curtain on consumer capitalism’s presence and power. At this task, they are almost uniformly successful.

Take, for example, the stories of Tiger Woods and Michael Jordan, both of whom are interpreted here in large part as products of Nike’s media machine. Both are African Americans who seemingly could offer avenues for social change, but instead become tools for reproducing dominant American stories. In other words, instead of showing the ways in which their success in sport was linked to particular social networks and other external factors not available to all young people, the images produced reinforce the essentially conservative narratives of individual hard work, “traditional” family values, and color-blindness. In doing this, the public Woods and Jordan valorize the myth of the American dream, leaving those who have not been so successful with only themselves to blame.

Interestingly, while the images of stars are carefully constructed to generate a sense of intimacy with consumers, the authors and editors of _Sport Stars_ seem to reject the importance of the person behind the celebrity. That is, the authors’ critical perspective seems to deny the agency of the stars themselves. While the essays do an excellent job of describing the roles of various institutional players in producing the images and stories of celebrities, they implicitly reject the power of the celebrities as individual human beings. In the chapter on Michael Jordan, for example, Mary G. McDonald and David L. Andrews offer a laundry list of athletes hoping to be the next super-superstar, including Derek Jeter, Mike Bibby, and Randy Moss. What they do not address is why, despite apparently having the same institutional resources behind them, none has approached Jordan’s level of celebrity. Every few years the NBA seems to designate a “next Michael Jordan” in hopes of rekindling the public’s love affair with professional basketball, but to no avail.

The question remains: is the structure of the celebrity-producing machine (agents, teams, corporations, advertisers) enough, or would it take some human characteristic—call it agency or perhaps charisma—to make someone like a young LeBron James into a mega-star?

Another common thread in the essays is that the authors want to show that sports celebrities are “manufactured elements of _public culture,_ that consciously make visible individual personalities and practices in ways that seek to engage and inform _private experience_ ” (10). In other words, they want to explore the connections between the constructed narratives of the seventeen athletes discussed and the people who consume them. The authors convincingly connect the stars to particular ideologies, even in instances that are seemingly counterintuitive. Here we can think about the case of the former NBA player Dennis Rodman. A flamboyant, outspoken celebrity, Rodman might be seen on the surface as demonstrating a kind of resistance to dominant American culture and ideology. He is heavily tattooed and pierced, calls himself “the Worm,” speaks and writes brazenly about his unconventional sexual exploits and fantasies, and cross-dresses in public. yet what Melisse Lafrance and Genevieve Rail show by analyzing his comments and those of others about him, is that in spite of his aggressive, in-your-face presentation, Rodman’s story plays out in the trope of rags-to-riches through hard work and dedication. His eccentricity is framed as the expression of his uniquely American individual freedom, rather than as his oppositional stance towards American norms. Conversely, the deviant nature of his sexuality is used as a foil for more appropriate conduct, thereby reinforcing more conventional behaviors. And then there is the question of race. Like Jordan’s and Woods’s, Rodman’s celebrity status might be used to do work on the continuing problem of race in the U.S. Instead, since Rodman explicitly invokes a color-blind ideology and the value of meritocracy in his publications, the ongoing preponderance of African Americans at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder can continue to be blamed solely on those individuals and their values, rather than on any continuing systemic racial inequality.

While the authors have clearly fulfilled the objectives of their project, something appears to be missing. If being framed as traditional and hardworking—as in the cases of Jordan and Woods—is not useful for social change, and being framed as deviant and hardworking—Rodman—is not useful for social change, what in the logics of these scholars would be useful? Their answer involves somehow stemming the tide of consumer capitalism, which as a system diminishes the potential for change by pursuing the ideologies most favorable to its longevity and expansion. However sympathetic one might be to this aim, the answer is unsatisfying, as no practical suggestion about how this might be pursued is forthcoming. While a fix for the destruction of capitalist markets may not have been the goal of _Sport Stars,_ perhaps some acknowledgement of agency, of the humanity of the celebrities themselves, or even of those on the production side, could lead us out of the spiral of the reproduction of inequality.

One chapter in the volume brings to light provocative ways of thinking about sports celebrity not illuminated as clearly in the others. In his essay on British soccer star David Beckham, Garry Whannel (also the editor of the other volume under consideration here) offers an explanation of something potentially troubling about _Sport Stars,_ that is, the relatively small number of women discussed. He argues that “sport star images involve complex condensations of discourses of masculinity, and morality, shaped by the self-referential and intertextual constructions of celebrityhood” (138). This claim might help explain the dearth of women in the volume, a gender disparity especially striking in light of the critical perspective of both editors and contributors. If the narratives offered in sports are, as Whannel suggests, predominantly masculine and are important for the construction of masculinity, then we can understand the under-representation of case studies of women as a result of the schemas available to discuss sports celebrities. This connection between sports and masculinity is not benign, though, as we can see by turning to the other study mentioned at the outset, Whannel’s _Media Sport Stars._ In his book, Whannel tells us that “sport characteristically provides a space for the eradication, marginalization and symbolic annihilation of the feminine” (45). This is one of the many suggestive arguments to be found in his book.

By virtue of its proportions and organization, a monograph has different goals from an edited volume, and has the capacity to offer a more in-depth and probing analysis of its subject. Where _Sport Stars_ gave us a stimulating introduction to the multiplicity of reasons for the scholarly study of celebrity athletes, along with a series of revealing case studies, _Media Sport Stars_ has the theoretical heft to bear out that promise of potential. While the breadth of theory examined might be overwhelming for some readers, Whannel handles it in an accessible manner by consistently grounding his analysis in practical, well-known examples. He dismisses simplistic notions of athletes as either positive role models or villains leading children astray, and insists that we explore the more complex relationship between celebrity, media, masculinity, and morality. He introduces, for example, the concept of “vortextuality,” which describes how today’s media converges on celebrities and “super-events” (think of celebrity weddings and trials) as if drawn into a vortex. That we are all so aware of the omnipresence of paparazzi lurking in the shadows to capture images of stars at their worst seems to illustrate Whannel’s point. That these photographs are part of a billion-dollar industry leads back to some of the questions which opened this review.

Looking more closely at chapters three through five, which specify the theoretical framing of the sports star, Whannel begins by giving a history of the development of sports coverage in the media and the role changing technology and representation have had on the production of sports stars. He then unpacks the relationship between stars and heroes through an investigation of the narrative of heroes over the past century, especially as sports increasingly becomes a part of that narrative. Among his many keen insights is his suggestion that as morality claims have been increasingly destabilized as a result of the postmodern turn, athletes have moved to the center of notions of the heroic. This happens because sports ostensibly occur outside any particular moral story (aside from locale or nation), and therefore sports stars are accessible to anyone. Additionally, sports celebrities have an ephemeral quality linked to physicality that is fitting to a period of shifting claims, but in which the public desire for heroes remains. Finally, Whannel moves forward to make an argument about the ways the narrative of the individual sports star brings together these multiple factors of morality, masculinity, the nation, and media.

Ultimately, the combination of these two books is a winning one. The many stories told in _Sport Stars_ prime us for a more thorough-going analytical framework within which we can consider sports celebrities. Whannel’s _Media Sport Stars_ fulfills that task by bringing multiple perspectives to bear on the intersection of sports, masculinity, and morality, and providing analytical tools for looking at celebrity culture more broadly.