---
title: History and Memory
authors:
- Monica Black
publication: hedgehog-review
date: Summer 2007
url: https://hedgehogreview.com/issues/the-uses-of-the-past/articles/jay-winters-remembering-war
word_count: 1196
subtitle: A review of Jay Winter’s Remembering War
issue: The Uses of the Past
section: Book Reviews
---

# History and Memory

*A review of Jay Winter’s Remembering War*

Jay Winter observes—and is likely to find broad agreement among scholars— that we are in the midst of a “memory boom,” whose reverberations are felt well beyond the academy, in an ever-multiplying number of museums and exhibits, as well as in the arts. Certainly, in history, a significant and growing body of work continues to emerge, which seeks to trace memories of particular events or phenomena, including Winter’s own crucial work on the First World War. Yet despite the attention given to memory by historians, they have often left unaddressed a question of vital, historical interest: what prompted the twentieth century’s preoccupation with memory in the first place? In _Remembering War_ , Winter presents a compelling argument for locating the origins of the memory boom—at least in part—in the experience of World War I.

Winter begins by outlining the trajectory of the memory boom over the last century and points to the factors that have influenced it. He then turns his attention to the cultural impact, in Europe and beyond, of shell shock. In what is perhaps the book’s most evocative chapter, “Shell Shock, Memory, and Identity,” he examines attempts during World War I to represent the disorder—medically, psychologically, and as literature—which, he argues, fundamentally reconfigured contemporaries’ ideas about the relationship between memory and identity. As a result, shell shock quickly became (and has remained, in its more recent iteration, post-traumatic stress disorder) paradigmatic for how we understand the effects of violence on the human personality. In the wake of the war and mass death, individuals and groups sought to commemorate those experiences of violence and their consequences through a variety of means, from photography to the construction of war memorials to the writing and anthologizing of war letters.

It was only many years later, in the 1970s and 1980s, however, that what Winter calls the twentieth century’s “second generation” of memory emerged, this time in response to the Second World War. Directly after 1945, memories of resistance, not of trauma, were central to rebuilding the European community. Then, in the 60s, the children of the war generation began to insist that their parents be held to account for complicity in the crimes of Nazism. In this moment, the “second generation”—our generation, today—was born. Winter names a score of developments he sees as having fostered the present memory boom since that time, including the emergence of the politics of identity; increased affluence, which has made “identity into a commodity” (39); the scientific legitimation of trauma; and, in the historical profession, the attention paid over the last twenty years or so to the signifying practices through which people construct meaning in their world.

In the concluding chapters, Winter turns a critical eye on what he refers to as the “overdetermined” quality of memory— the “tendency of commentators to term any and every narrative of past events as constituents of…collective memory” (183). Invoking Walter Benjamin’s notion of memory as a theater of the past, Winter focuses on film, public history (including his own work on a joint BBC/American Public Broadcasting series on World War I, and on a French World War I museum, the _Historial de la Grande Guerre_), and on the emergence of the “moral witness as an iconic figure in the memory boom” (239). Each of these chapters addresses the relationship between history and memory and, equally important, how it is presently being reconfigured.

Throughout this work, Winter emphasizes his view of memory as a metaphor for acts of remembrance that are necessarily social. Critical of a frequent conceptual indeterminateness where the notion of memory is concerned, he suggests (as he has also done in earlier work with Emmanuel Sivan) substituting the idea of remembrance for memory, precisely because the former implies specificity and agency: individuals and groups engaging in symbolic practices to remember something that has meaning for them. He is scrupulous, moreover, in emphasizing that each site of memory—a photograph, a letter, a memoir—stands before us not as “raw evidence” of the past but as a carefully constructed representation of it from a particular point of view. He is equally illuminating in his reflections on the “reconfigur[ation]” of “the space between history and memory” (9). He eschews the frequent assertion that the rigorously evidentiary nature of the professional practice of history is threatened by those engaged in practices of remembrance. He equally rejects the notion that individual conservators of memory— those who “lived through” history—tell a story more “true” or authentic than the narratives reconstructed by historians; for, as he notes, the memories of individual witnesses to history are “just as much social constructions as are those they reject or rebuke” (270). Winter usefully reminds us that history and memory “overlap in too many ways to be considered as pure categories”; he suggests seeing them, together, “as describing a field of force in social thought and…action” and recognizing the “creative space between the two” (288).

One last issue Winter raises, however, bears further reflection. He sees the memory boom having resulted from the “need to…acknowledge the victims of war and the ravages it causes” (1). A “real acceptance” has emerged, he writes, “that among us…are men and women overwhelmed by traumatic recollection” (43). These statements would seem to suggest a psychological necessity on the part of the victim of violence to tell his or her story and a moral obligation on the part of society to hear it. As compelling as this idea is to us in the present, it did not always have the same valency after 1945. Winter notes that in 1947 the reception of Primo Levi’s first book _Se questo è un uomo_ (“If This Be a Man,” published in the U.S. under the title _Survival in Auschwitz_) “was polite but very restrained” (27). The gap in time between the events of World War II and the Holocaust and the flood of remembrance that began toward the end of the 1970s is a crucial one that perhaps deserves more attention. Many other changes had to take place before acknowledgment of the victims of World War II and the Holocaust emerged as either a moral or a psychological imperative for vast numbers of people. Thus, when we speak of the “need to acknowledge,” may we not run the risk of naturalizing or universalizing the memory boom and its connection to the experience of war? One wonders whether there is, in fact, a necessary connection between the horror of war and a need to express that horror. In the Soviet Union, as Winter observes, the specific memory of World War I was eclipsed by the 1917 revolutions and the civil war, and, in her studies of shell shock and of perceptions of death in Russia, Catherine Merridale has shown that the notion of trauma is not operable for most Russians, despite their devastating experiences in the twentieth century. Trauma is, indeed, “contested terrain” (191). The question bears asking then: is the desire to speak out when one is “overwhelmed by traumatic recollection” a product of some historical circumstances and not of others? Perhaps memory is not so much overdetermined as it is serving other, not as yet fully recognized, purposes in contemporary life.