---
title: Higher Education in Americaby Derek Bok
authors:
- Chad Wellmon
publication: hedgehog-review
date: Summer 2015
url: https://hedgehogreview.com/issues/the-body-in-question/articles/higher-education-in-america-by-derek-bok
word_count: 902
issue: The Body in Question
section: Book Reviews
---

# Higher Education in Americaby Derek Bok

The University of Virginia, where I teach, does many different things. It runs a medical system with a 631-bed hospital, twenty-three research centers, and a medical school. It manages an entertainment business that hosts everything from Pearl Jam concerts to monster truck rallies. It supports a start-up incubator for new business ventures. It coordinates a community-wide sustainability effort. It feeds thousands of people every day. It serves as an industry and government research center. It fields twenty-five varsity sports teams. And in addition to all that, it educates more than 20,000 students a year, while supporting the research of some 2,000 fulltime faculty members. Like most universities today, the University of Virginia isn’t just an educational institution. It’s a conglomerate.

In 1963 in the middle of the post–World War II higher education boom, when college enrollments were surging and federal research dollars were flowing, Clark Kerr, then-president of the University of California, christened this new institution the “multiversity.” During the twentieth century, he argued, the university had ceased to be a unified community harnessed a single purpose. It had fragmented into several communities. This new institution, Kerr noted, was to be neither loved nor loathed; it was to be managed. Like any other modern institution, it was to be run by organization men and women, administrators who managed a panoply of corporate enterprises. The new, modern multiversity wasn’t the quaint collegiate community of the past; it was a “mechanism held together by administrative rules and powered by money.” And its leader, as Thorstein Veblen had put it a half century earlier, was not an intellectual leader but rather a “captain of erudition.”

But even as Kerr defended the “multiversity” as the epitome of higher education, he acknowledged that its lack of a clear purpose made it susceptible to competing visions of a university’s purpose. Should the university primarily prepare students for the work force? Should it serve the public more broadly through technical advice and public service? Should it lead the advancement of new knowledge? Should it spur economic growth? Should it educate students to lead rich and full lives?

In his book _Higher Education in America_ , former Harvard president Derek Bok not only embraces Kerr’s “multiversity” but also insists that this institutional form, not the ones typified by the colleges of Oxbridge or the German research university, has become a “model for other countries around the world.” Indeed, he claims that the pursuit of multiple ends has allowed American universities to produce a whole that is “greater than the sum of its parts.” The dual imperative for faculty to teach and conduct research makes professors better teachers and better researchers. The pursuit of economic development and research allows universities to give their scientists access to industry databases and resources. The commitment to public service, whether expressed in undergraduates tutoring in local schools or professors advising government agencies, enriches the university. The university benefits from the “synergies,” both expected and unexpected, of its several pursuits. Its varied and multiple goals make it a better institution.

And yet, like Kerr, Bok concedes that the pursuit of so many different goals can make the university a confused and conflicted institution. As university interests and activities expand, so too do the administrative staffs that manage them. And as the number of deans, provosts, program officers, and budget officers increases, so too do the competing interests. The university becomes a corporation, with its many divisions vying for resources, prestige, and attention. Within the modern day multiversity, the job of university leaders is simply to manage, as Bok puts it, “a proper balance” among the institution’s multiple, oftentimes competing interests.

But how among these competing ends and purposes is such a “proper balance” to be found? Bok occasionally invokes the “basic academic values of the university” as orienting guidelines. He implores trustees, presidents, deans, and faculty members to work together to preserve “basic” and “important” values. He notes the importance of “honesty” in research, “impartiality and disinterestedness in scholarship,” “freedom of thought,” and “quality teaching and research.” But he only vaguely alludes to what these are, where they come from, and how they are to be sustained.

And it is because of this vagueness that one senses that these values have no real home in the multiversity. Of course, Bok insists that they must have a place in order to provide multiversity leaders with a common set of standards by which to reconcile their competing interests. This, however, is little more than a reduction of academic values to instrumental ends and even window-dressing. Without them, the multiversity Bok describes so well would more closely resemble General Electric than the venerable institutions of Paris, Bologna, or Berlin.

The real home of these values is an institution that, sadly, may be on the verge of extinction: the research university or, perhaps more broadly, the academy, where the ideals and traditions dedicated to creating and sharing knowledge flourished. As universities divert their resources from more clearly academic ends, perhaps it’s time for academics to think about what historian Johann Neem calls an “academy in exile.” Consider, for example, the myriad German research institutes founded in the early twentieth century out of frustration with the bureaucratic behemoths that German universities had become. Maybe academics—now a pejorative term for the socially irrelevant and economically unproductive—should abandon the multiversity and their managerial masters and discover again what it’s like to think freely.